EMPLOYMENT INSURANCE ACT
S.C. 1996, c. 23

An Act respecting employment insurance in Canada

Current to 2026-01-01
Last amended on 2024-07-01


PART I

UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS

INTERPRETATION

2. (1) In this Part,

"benefit period" means the period described in section 10;

"benefit rate" means the weekly rate of benefits payable to a claimant under
section 14;

"claimant" means a person who has made a claim for benefits under this Part;

"employment" means employment in insurable employment;

"insurable employment" has the meaning assigned by section 5;

"interruption of earnings" means an interruption that occurs in the earnings of an
insured person from any employment;

"qualifying period" means the period described in subsection 7(3);

"rate of weekly insurable earnings" means the amount determined under section 14;

"regional rate of unemployment" means the rate of unemployment for the economic
region in which the claimant ordinarily resides, as determined by Statistics Canada.


INSURABLE EMPLOYMENT

5. (1) Subject to subsection (2), insurable employment is

    (a) employment in Canada by one or more employers, under any express or
    implied contract of service or apprenticeship, written or oral, whether the
    earnings of the employed person are received from the employer or some other
    person and whether the earnings are calculated by time or by the piece, or
    partly by time and partly by the piece, or otherwise;

    (b) employment in Canada as described in paragraph (a) by Her Majesty in right
    of Canada;

    (c) service in the Canadian Forces or in any other force prescribed by the
    regulations.

Excluded employment

(2) Insurable employment does not include

    (a) employment of a casual nature other than for the purpose of the employer's
    trade or business;

    (b) employment of a person by a corporation if the person controls more than
    forty per cent of the voting shares of that corporation; or

    (c) employment prescribed by the regulations as not being insurable employment.


QUALIFICATION FOR BENEFITS

7. (1) Unemployment benefits are payable as provided in this Part to an insured
person who qualifies to receive them.

Qualification requirements

(2) An insured person qualifies if the person

    (a) has had an interruption of earnings from employment; and

    (b) has had, during the qualifying period, the number of hours of insurable
    employment set out in the following table in relation to the regional rate of
    unemployment that applies to the person:

    Regional Rate of Unemployment      Required Number of Hours
    6% and under                        700
    more than 6% but not more than 7%   665
    more than 7% but not more than 8%   630
    more than 8% but not more than 9%   595
    more than 9% but not more than 10%  560
    more than 10% but not more than 11% 525
    more than 11% but not more than 12% 490
    more than 12% but not more than 13% 455
    more than 13%                       420

Qualifying period

(3) The qualifying period of an insured person is the shorter of

    (a) the 52-week period immediately before the beginning of a benefit period, and

    (b) the period that begins on the first day of an immediately preceding benefit
    period and ends with the end of the week before the beginning of a benefit
    period under this subsection.

Extension of qualifying period

(4) The qualifying period mentioned in subsection (3) is extended by the number of
weeks during which the insured person was

    (a) confined in a jail, penitentiary or other similar institution;

    (b) not employed in insurable employment and was in receipt of benefits under a
    provincial law on the basis of having ceased to work by reason of pregnancy;

    (c) in receipt of payments under a provincial law on the basis of having adopted a
    child; or

    (d) in receipt of assistance under employment benefits provided by the
    Commission.


BENEFIT PERIOD

10. (1) A benefit period begins on the later of

    (a) the Sunday of the week in which the interruption of earnings occurs, and

    (b) the Sunday of the week in which the initial claim for benefits is made.

Duration of benefit period

(2) Subject to subsections (10) to (15), a benefit period ends on the earlier of

    (a) the Saturday following the Saturday that falls fifty-two weeks after the
    beginning of the benefit period, and

    (b) the Saturday following the last week for which benefits are payable in the
    benefit period.


RATE OF WEEKLY BENEFITS

14. (1) The rate of weekly benefits payable to a claimant is fifty-five per cent of their
weekly insurable earnings.

Maximum weekly insurable earnings

(2) For the purposes of this section, the weekly insurable earnings of a claimant are
the quotient obtained by dividing the claimant's insurable earnings in the rate
calculation period by the number of best weeks determined under section 14.1.

Maximum yearly insurable earnings

(3) The maximum yearly insurable earnings for a year are the amount determined
under section 4 of the Insurable Earnings and Collection of Premiums Act.

14.1 For the purposes of subsection 14(2), the number of best weeks is

    Regional Rate of Unemployment      Number of Best Weeks
    6% and under                        22
    more than 6% but not more than 7%   21
    more than 7% but not more than 8%   20
    more than 8% but not more than 9%   19
    more than 9% but not more than 10%  18
    more than 10% but not more than 11% 17
    more than 11% but not more than 12% 16
    more than 12% but not more than 13% 15
    more than 13%                       14


MAXIMUM NUMBER OF WEEKS

12. (1) The maximum number of weeks for which benefits may be paid in a benefit
period is determined in accordance with the following table, based on the regional rate
of unemployment applicable to the claimant and the number of hours of insurable
employment in the qualifying period:

[Table varies from 14 to 45 weeks depending on hours accumulated and regional
unemployment rate. The minimum entitlement is 14 weeks (for claimants with the
minimum qualifying hours in regions with the lowest unemployment) and the maximum
is 45 weeks (for claimants with 1820+ hours in regions with unemployment above
13%).]


WAITING PERIOD

13. (1) A claimant is not entitled to be paid benefits until a period of one week has
elapsed following the beginning of a benefit period.

Exception

(2) The waiting period described in subsection (1) does not apply where

    (a) the claimant has already served a waiting period in the 52-week period
    preceding the current benefit period; or

    (b) the waiting period is waived by the Commission in prescribed circumstances.


EARNINGS AND ALLOCATION

19. (1) Where a claimant receives earnings during a benefit period, those earnings
shall be allocated to weeks in accordance with the regulations.

Deduction

(2) Subject to subsection (3), the amount of earnings allocated to a week shall be
deducted from the benefits otherwise payable for that week.

Allowable earnings

(3) A claimant may earn, in any week for which benefits are payable, the greater of

    (a) ninety dollars, and

    (b) twenty-five per cent of the claimant's weekly benefit rate

without any deduction from the benefits payable for that week. For each dollar earned
above this threshold, benefits are reduced by fifty cents.


DISQUALIFICATION

27. (1) A claimant is disqualified from receiving benefits if the claimant lost the
employment by reason of the claimant's own misconduct.

Duration of disqualification

(2) A disqualification under subsection (1) is for each week of the claimant's benefit
period following the waiting period, up to a maximum of the number of weeks that
would otherwise be payable.

28. (1) A claimant is disqualified from receiving benefits if the claimant voluntarily
left the employment without just cause.

Just cause

(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), just cause for voluntarily leaving an
employment exists where, having regard to all the circumstances, including any of the
following, the claimant had no reasonable alternative to leaving:

    (a) sexual or other harassment;
    (b) obligation to accompany a spouse or dependent child to another residence;
    (c) discrimination;
    (d) working conditions that constitute a danger to health or safety;
    (e) obligation to care for a child or a member of the immediate family;
    (f) reasonable assurance of another employment in the immediate future;
    (g) significant modification of terms and conditions respecting wages or salary;
    (h) excessive overtime work or refusal to pay for overtime work;
    (i) significant changes in work duties;
    (j) antagonism with a supervisor;
    (k) practices of an employer that are contrary to law.


CROSS-REFERENCE TABLE

Section 5        -->   Definition of insurable employment
Section 7        -->   Qualification requirements
Section 7(3)     -->   Qualifying period
Section 7(4)     -->   Extension of qualifying period
Section 10       -->   Benefit period
Section 12       -->   Maximum weeks of benefits
Section 13       -->   Waiting period
Section 14       -->   Benefit rate (55% of insurable earnings)
Section 14.1     -->   Best weeks divisor
Section 19       -->   Earnings during benefit period
Section 27       -->   Disqualification: misconduct
Section 28       -->   Disqualification: voluntary leaving
