OLD AGE SECURITY ACT
R.S.C., 1985, c. O-9

An Act respecting Old Age Security

Current to 2026-01-01
Last amended on 2024-07-01

SHORT TITLE

1. This Act may be cited as the Old Age Security Act.

INTERPRETATION

2. In this Act,

"applicant" means a person who has applied for a benefit under this Act;

"application" means an application for a benefit under this Act;

"benefit" means a pension, supplement, allowance or any other benefit payable under
this Act;

"Minister" means the Minister of Employment and Social Development;

"pension" means the monthly pension authorized to be paid under Part I;

"prescribed" means prescribed by regulation;

"Supplement" means the guaranteed income supplement authorized to be paid under
Part II;

"Tribunal" means the Social Security Tribunal established under the Department of
Employment and Social Development Act.


PART I

MONTHLY PENSION

Eligibility

3. (1) Subject to this Act and the regulations, a full monthly pension may be paid to
every person who

    (a) has attained sixty-five years of age; and

    (b) has, after attaining eighteen years of age, resided in Canada for not less than
    forty years.

Partial pension

(2) Subject to this Act and the regulations, a partial monthly pension may be paid for
any month in a payment quarter to every person who

    (a) has attained sixty-five years of age;

    (b) has, after attaining eighteen years of age, resided in Canada for an aggregate
    period of not less than ten years but less than forty years; and

    (c) satisfies the requirements of subsection (3).

Minimum residency for partial pension

(3) For the purposes of paragraph (2)(c), a person satisfies the requirements of this
subsection if that person

    (a) was a Canadian citizen or a legal resident of Canada on the day preceding the
    day on which that person's application was approved; or

    (b) had been a Canadian citizen or a legal resident of Canada at any time during
    the ten-year period immediately preceding the day referred to in paragraph (a).

Amount of partial pension

(4) The amount of the partial monthly pension that may be paid to a person shall bear
the same relation to the full monthly pension as the aggregate period of residence of
that person in Canada after attaining eighteen years of age, but not exceeding forty
years, bears to forty years, calculated as follows:

    Partial pension = Full pension x (Years of Residence / 40)

where "Years of Residence" is the lesser of

    (a) the aggregate number of years of residence in Canada after the person
    attained eighteen years of age, and

    (b) forty.

Rounding

(5) In the calculation of a partial pension under subsection (4),

    (a) a part of a year of residence that is less than six months shall be disregarded;
    and

    (b) a part of a year of residence that is six months or more shall be counted as a
    full year.

Payment outside Canada

3.1 (1) Subject to subsection (2), no pension may be paid under this Part to any
person who is outside Canada unless that person

    (a) has resided in Canada, after attaining eighteen years of age, for at least
    twenty years; or

    (b) was, at the time of departure from Canada, in receipt of a pension under this
    Part.

Limitation

(2) Where a person who is outside Canada is in receipt of a partial pension under
subsection 3(2) and has not, after attaining eighteen years of age, resided in Canada
for at least twenty years, payment of that pension shall be suspended at the expiry
of the sixth month after the month in which the person left Canada.


APPLICATION

5. (1) No pension may be paid to any person unless an application therefor has been
made by that person or on that person's behalf and payment of the pension has been
approved under this Act.

Form and manner

(2) An application for a pension shall be made in the prescribed form and manner
and shall be filed at a place determined by the Minister, or shall be made in any other
manner and filed at any other place that the Minister may, by order, specify.

Information and evidence

(3) An application shall be accompanied by any information and evidence that the
Minister may require, including

    (a) proof of the applicant's age;

    (b) proof of the applicant's periods of residence in Canada;

    (c) proof of the applicant's Canadian citizenship or legal resident status, or
    evidence thereof; and

    (d) the applicant's Social Insurance Number.

Deemed application date

(4) Where an application for a pension is approved, the application shall be deemed
to have been made in the month preceding the month in which payment of the pension
commences, unless the applicant requests otherwise.

Waiver of application requirement

5.1 The Minister may, in prescribed circumstances, waive the requirement for an
application under section 5 and approve the payment of a pension to any person who
is eligible under section 3 if the Minister is satisfied that the information and evidence
available is sufficient to establish the person's eligibility.


AMOUNT OF PENSION

6. (1) The basic monthly amount of a full pension is the amount set out in Schedule I,
subject to any adjustments made pursuant to section 7.

Quarterly adjustment

7. (1) The amount of the full monthly pension shall be adjusted quarterly, in the
months of January, April, July and October, so that the amount payable for any month
in a payment quarter is the product obtained by multiplying

    (a) the amount of the full monthly pension that was payable for any month in the
    three-month period immediately before the payment quarter

by

    (b) the ratio that the Consumer Price Index for the first adjustment quarter bears
    to the Consumer Price Index for the second adjustment quarter.

Consumer Price Index

(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), the Consumer Price Index for any adjustment
quarter is the average of the Consumer Price Index for each month in that quarter, as
published by Statistics Canada under the authority of the Statistics Act.


PAYMENT OF PENSION

8. (1) Where payment of a pension is approved, the pension is payable for each month
commencing with the month following the month in which the application was approved
or, where section 5.1 applies, from the month determined by the Minister.

Suspension and cancellation

(2) Where, at any time, a pensioner is not entitled to receive payment of a pension,
the Minister may

    (a) suspend payment of the pension; or

    (b) cancel the pension.

Reinstatement

(3) Where a pension has been suspended under paragraph (2)(a), the Minister may
reinstate the pension from the first day of the month following the month in which the
pensioner again becomes entitled.


RECOVERY OF OVERPAYMENTS

9. (1) Where a person has received or obtained a benefit payment to which the person
is not entitled or a benefit payment in excess of the amount of the benefit payment to
which the person is entitled, the amount of the benefit payment or excess payment, as
the case may be, constitutes a debt due to Her Majesty and is recoverable at any time
in the Federal Court or any other court of competent jurisdiction or in any other manner
provided by this Act.

Deductions from future payments

(2) The amount of any debt referred to in subsection (1) may, subject to the
regulations, be recovered at any time by deduction from any future benefit payments
payable to the debtor under this Act.


AGREEMENTS WITH PROVINCES

10. The Minister may, with the approval of the Governor in Council, enter into an
agreement with any province providing for the administration by the province of this
Act or any portion thereof within the province.


OFFENCES AND PUNISHMENT

11. (1) Every person who

    (a) knowingly makes a false or misleading statement in an application or in
    connection with an application,

    (b) being required under this Act or the regulations to furnish information or
    produce documents, knowingly makes a false or misleading statement or
    furnishes false or misleading information or produces false or misleading
    documents,

    (c) makes or causes to be made a claim for a benefit knowing that the person is
    not entitled to the benefit,

    (d) obtains a benefit payment by false pretences, or

    (e) being the payee of a benefit cheque, knowingly negotiates or attempts to
    negotiate the cheque when the person is not entitled to the benefit or to the
    amount of the benefit

is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.

Penalty

(2) Every person who is guilty of an offence under subsection (1) is liable to a fine
not exceeding five thousand dollars or to a term of imprisonment not exceeding six
months, or to both.

Limitation period

(3) Proceedings for an offence under this section may be commenced at any time
within but not later than five years after the time when the subject-matter of the
proceedings arose.


REGULATIONS

12. The Governor in Council may make regulations

    (a) defining the expressions "residence" and "resided" for the purposes of this
    Act;

    (b) providing for the manner of proving age, residence and other qualifications of
    an applicant;

    (c) prescribing the form and manner of applications;

    (d) respecting the payment of benefits, including the time and manner of payment;

    (e) providing for the suspension or cancellation of a benefit;

    (f) providing for the reinstatement of a benefit that has been suspended or
    cancelled;

    (g) prescribing the circumstances in which the requirement for an application may
    be waived under section 5.1;

    (h) respecting the recovery of overpayments and debts;

    (i) prescribing anything that by this Act is to be prescribed; and

    (j) generally for carrying out the purposes and provisions of this Act.


SCHEDULE I
(Section 6)

BASIC MONTHLY PENSION AMOUNTS

The basic monthly amount of the full pension, effective January 2026, is $727.67,
subject to quarterly adjustments under section 7.

Note: This amount is adjusted quarterly based on the Consumer Price Index. Refer
to the most recent Quarterly Adjustment Order for the current amount.


CROSS-REFERENCE TABLE

Section 3        -->   Eligibility (pension)
Section 3(2)     -->   Partial pension calculation
Section 3.1      -->   Payment outside Canada
Section 5        -->   Application requirements
Section 5.1      -->   Waiver of application
Section 6        -->   Amount of pension (Schedule I)
Section 7        -->   Quarterly adjustment (CPI)
Section 8        -->   Payment, suspension, reinstatement
Section 9        -->   Recovery of overpayments
Section 11       -->   Offences and punishment
Section 12       -->   Regulation-making authority
Part II          -->   Guaranteed Income Supplement (see separate excerpt)
Part III         -->   Allowance and Allowance for the Survivor (see separate excerpt)
