OLD AGE SECURITY REGULATIONS
C.R.C., c. 1246

Regulations Respecting Old Age Security

Current to 2026-01-01
Last amended on 2024-07-01

Registered SOR/2013-23


INTERPRETATION

1. In these Regulations,

"Act" means the Old Age Security Act;

"applicant" means a person who has applied for a benefit under the Act;

"approved information" means information that the Minister considers sufficient to
determine eligibility under the Act.


PART I

PROOF OF AGE

2. (1) For the purpose of establishing age, an applicant shall provide

    (a) a birth certificate or a certified copy thereof;

    (b) a baptismal certificate or a certified copy thereof; or

    (c) where neither a birth certificate nor a baptismal certificate is obtainable, any
    other evidence of age that is satisfactory to the Minister.

Statutory declaration

(2) Where an applicant is unable to provide any of the documents referred to in
subsection (1), the applicant may furnish a statutory declaration setting out

    (a) the date and place of birth of the applicant;

    (b) the reasons why the documents referred to in subsection (1) are unobtainable;
    and

    (c) the names and addresses of at least two persons who have knowledge of the
    facts declared by the applicant.

Additional evidence

(3) The Minister may require an applicant who furnishes a statutory declaration under
subsection (2) to provide additional evidence corroborating the facts declared.


PROOF OF RESIDENCE

3. (1) For the purpose of establishing residence in Canada, an applicant shall provide

    (a) a passport or a certified copy thereof showing dates of entry into and
    departure from Canada;

    (b) landing documents or immigration records;

    (c) income tax returns filed with the Canada Revenue Agency for the relevant
    periods;

    (d) records of employment in Canada;

    (e) records of participation in Canadian provincial or territorial health insurance
    plans; or

    (f) any other evidence of residence that is satisfactory to the Minister.

Aggregate period of residence

(2) For the purpose of calculating the aggregate period of residence of a person in
Canada after attaining eighteen years of age, as required by section 3 of the Act,

    (a) any period of absence from Canada that does not exceed one year shall be
    deemed to be a period of residence in Canada if the person was ordinarily
    resident in Canada immediately before and after the absence;

    (b) a period of absence from Canada of more than one year but not exceeding
    four years shall be deemed to be a period of residence in Canada if

        (i) the person was ordinarily resident in Canada immediately before the
        absence,

        (ii) the person maintained a dwelling place in Canada during the absence,
        or

        (iii) the person was employed outside Canada by the Government of Canada,
        a Canadian province or territory, or a Canadian employer; and

    (c) a period of absence from Canada that exceeds four years shall not be deemed
    to be a period of residence in Canada unless the person demonstrates that they
    maintained significant ties to Canada during the absence.

Intention to reside

(3) In determining whether a person is or was ordinarily resident in Canada, the
Minister shall consider

    (a) the person's ties to Canada, including dwelling place, family connections,
    personal property, social ties, and economic interests;

    (b) the person's ties to any country other than Canada;

    (c) the regularity and length of the person's stays in Canada and absences from
    Canada; and

    (d) the person's expressed intention regarding residence.


PROOF OF CITIZENSHIP OR LEGAL RESIDENT STATUS

4. (1) For the purpose of establishing Canadian citizenship, an applicant shall provide

    (a) a Canadian citizenship certificate;

    (b) a Canadian passport; or

    (c) any other evidence of citizenship that is satisfactory to the Minister.

Legal resident status

(2) For the purpose of establishing legal resident status in Canada, an applicant shall
provide

    (a) a Permanent Resident Card or a certified copy thereof;

    (b) a Confirmation of Permanent Residence document;

    (c) a Record of Landing (IMM 1000);

    (d) an immigration visa showing that the applicant has been admitted to Canada
    for permanent residence; or

    (e) any other evidence of legal resident status that is satisfactory to the Minister.


APPLICATION PROCEDURES

5. (1) An application for a pension under Part I of the Act shall

    (a) be made on a form approved by the Minister or by any other means that the
    Minister may specify;

    (b) be signed by the applicant or, where the applicant is unable to sign, by a
    person authorized to act on the applicant's behalf;

    (c) include the applicant's Social Insurance Number;

    (d) include the information and evidence required by section 5 of the Act and
    these Regulations; and

    (e) be filed

        (i) at a Service Canada office,

        (ii) by mail to the address specified by the Minister, or

        (iii) by electronic means, in the manner specified by the Minister.

Acknowledgement of application

(2) The Minister shall, within thirty days of receiving an application, send to the
applicant an acknowledgement of receipt of the application.

Decision

(3) The Minister shall, after considering an application and the information and
evidence provided, approve or refuse the application and notify the applicant of the
decision.

Request for additional information

(4) Where the Minister requires additional information or evidence in connection with
an application, the Minister shall send a written request to the applicant specifying

    (a) the additional information or evidence required;

    (b) the period within which the additional information or evidence must be
    provided, which period shall not be less than thirty days from the date of the
    request; and

    (c) the consequences of failing to provide the additional information or evidence
    within the specified period.

Failure to provide information

(5) Where an applicant fails to provide the additional information or evidence within
the period specified under paragraph (4)(b), the Minister may refuse the application
on the basis of the information available.


PAYMENT

6. (1) Payment of a pension shall be made by

    (a) direct deposit to a financial institution in Canada designated by the pensioner;
    or

    (b) cheque mailed to the address designated by the pensioner.

Monthly payment

(2) Payment of a pension shall be made on a monthly basis, on or about the last
three banking days of each month, for the month in which payment is due.

Payment outside Canada

(3) Where payment of a pension is made to a person who is outside Canada, the
Minister shall make the payment in Canadian dollars to

    (a) a financial institution in Canada designated by the pensioner; or

    (b) the address outside Canada designated by the pensioner.


RECOVERY OF OVERPAYMENTS

7. (1) Where an overpayment of a benefit has been made, the Minister shall notify the
debtor of

    (a) the amount of the overpayment;

    (b) the reason for the overpayment; and

    (c) the manner in which the overpayment may be repaid.

Rate of deduction

(2) Where the amount of an overpayment is to be recovered by deduction from future
benefit payments under subsection 9(2) of the Act, the rate of deduction shall not
exceed

    (a) one hundred per cent of the net monthly benefit payment, where the debtor
    consents in writing; or

    (b) in any other case, fifty per cent of the net monthly benefit payment.

Waiver

(3) The Minister may waive recovery of all or any portion of an overpayment if the
Minister is satisfied that

    (a) the overpayment was not caused by the debtor's misrepresentation or failure
    to disclose material facts; and

    (b) recovery of the overpayment would cause undue hardship to the debtor.
